For the TVMA, you know, but that was more, I
interviewed you a little bit for the TVMA, so I
thought I'd just like to get a little resume of your
life, talking about you, you know, not
necessarily TVMA. Why don't you give a little
resume of your career? You were born right in this
area, weren't you? Oh, actually I was born in
Austin, Texas. What was your birthday? July the
27th, 1915.
Born in Austin, right almost in the shadow of the
Capitol. When we went to school, we'd go across
town and I spent an hour running through the
rotundas of the Austin Capitol and visiting
during the legislative session, all that kind of
stuff. And see, my father was a printer. He came
from just the other side of De Leon, out in that true
mid-central Texas. Very few people know about De
Leon and Eastland and Sisko and through that
country. But my father was printing a newspaper by
the time he was 12 years old. My grandfather
traveled for a silver moon candy company. And
every time he'd get into some smaller town, a
little time to spare, he'd buy their scrap type at
the printing office. Just did paper bags, you
know. It took them a lot of time before they'd get
around and they'd have to sort it, put it back in its
proper places so the typesetter handled it almost
like a typewriter. He had a big case type thing and
he could feel A, B, C, Ds, E, F, Gs. He could just grab
them and and fill his plate by hand-spelling with
those linotype-prepared lead figures. Well, a
very long story short, Father came to Austin with
the Austin American States newspaper. And he was
picked up by Mr. Sticks, Edgar Sticks. Steck was
kind of an entrepreneur, and one of his desires was
he'd like to help print a bit. And so he and my father
together founded the Steck Print Company in
Austin. And of course, Steck is known statewide
for preparing most of the checks that go to the
banks and insurance policies. And back during the
centennial year of Texas, they published for the
first time. manuscripts, copied manuscripts.
Today they're known as Steck Vaughn. Vaughn was
pretty big in the publishing business and he took
over and it's still in existence. But my
father-in-office, Steck Printing Company, was
right downtown and we would visit him and maybe
ride with him home and so forth while I was in Austin
schools. And just before I went to A&M, My family
moved over on the south side of Austin in what's
called Travis Park. And there was a Mr. Norwood.
Had quite an estate over beyond this. The
expressway now runs almost through his property.
That forms into the expressway through Austin and
so on. Now, I worked for him during the summers.
looking after his swimming pool. A lifeguard,
pool manager, and so forth. He had a private pool.
And he got in trouble with income tax people, and he
lost everything except his homestead. And he had
to open his pool to the public. So while I was
babysitting this pool, there was a story in the
newspaper about Mark Francis, dean of the
veterinary school in Texas A&M. I took that paper
home and told my parents, I'm going to be a
veterinarian. That's the first ink that I ever
had, and that's how I got started. And the
following fall, I went to A&M, 1933,
in September, and graduated in 1937, June. And
almost had the same inspiration, I decided just
out of the clear blue that I liked New Belfast, and
so within a few hours' time of the state board, I was
in New Belfast, Texas, in practice, still in June
of 1937. You know, at the time you began practice,
did they still inflate udders for milk fever and
that sort of thing? Well, right off the verge, the
quackery is what we called it back at that stage. of
inflate the udder. But that did help. It seemed to
have some effect. The difficulty was the methods
they were using. They used everything from
bicycle pumps all the way through. It was
unsanitary. They would seal it by tying it with
just most any kind of boundary twine or anything.
But didn't didn't licensed veterinarians do that
also? Well, yes. You know, there was a very, very
narrow line at that time in the minds of young
veterinary students, which is still close to
today, that that old licensed practitioner was
just a step above the quacks. And there wasn't a
great deal of respect out for the older
practitioner because these new faggots
drugs and the drug development, that is, you know,
the first advent of the detail man who would come
around and explain the products and so forth.
Veterinarians owe a lot of their education in that
period of time to the detail people. who went back
to the home office, you know, and came back with how
they manufactured ship and how they manufactured
backgrounds. You know, give you a more of a
practical insight on what you were working with,
see. In the classroom and all, you knew the basic
principles and so forth, but you didn't know much
about the research that went behind it or the
difficulties it had with it or those type of
things. There was quite a transition. I was
fortunate. I came out in 37, like I say, it was
tough, lean years, still even in New Brunswick.
See, the Depression hit the Southwest and Texas
much later than it did up the country. You know, you
hear them talk about the 30s. Well, the Depression
didn't come down this way until pretty late in the
30s, and then it was very short-lived. But I was...
Before I had that difficult transition, coming to
a German community, I had to remember to get
specific directions, and I had to be careful
because they'd start off talking in German and
calling me, and I'd have to... you know, attempt to
interpret, but try to get them over to English and
get those proper directions working from there.
And then, of course, I was called, again, somewhat
like referred back to the various methods. A lot of
so-called ranchers and so forth at that time had
had a little bit of A&M, and either it failed or and
decided to come on home and practice. And so they
had a little smattering of animal health. There
was a period in there that we were a little debated a
lot about how much you teach the layman versus how
much you teach the student. And so when I came, a lot
of those calls were by Oh, I'd call them just trial
run. They just wanted to see if I knew anything. I
had some pretty good rounds with the individuals
who were just tested. One example, which is rather
absurd, the one guy called me out, a couple of sick
mules, or one sick mule. Yeah, a couple of mules.
One sick mule, I said to him, Took me down to the pit
and said, there they are. And I said, well, which
one are you seeking? He said, I don't know. That's
what I called you for. So I decided real quick, I
said, okay, here's my symbology. Go take the
temperature. Well, then we hit it off. We got along
all right. But those little type things. But back
to the subject matter principle, things were
pretty tough, but I had an offer and a chance to go
back to Vanderbilt University on a degree, or a
short course, or a seminar, or whatever you would
call them in old days. I'm a sanitary engineer. And
the state health department had indicated that
they would like to have me. And they sent me to
Vanderbilt University. I came back and joined the
State Department of Health in the division of
group. Was this a short course, or was this a...
Well, they were six months. a six-month period of
which we studied concrete stress. In those days,
everybody was held down, putting pit privies out
for everybody, upgrading from the old open toilet
to open pit. Just a big step. It was part of
Roosevelt's program of rural upgrading and so
forth. Very fascinating. It gave me quite an
exposure to a cross-section of individuals and
another slant at a different type university,
different surroundings. One of my old
classmates, for example, graduated with me. He
was a practitioner in Nashville, Tennessee, and
he took me out of his way. He was a much older person.
I'd say he was in his late 30s before he finished
A&M. And his father was, well, his name was White.
His father had invented and developed numerous
veterinary instruments. The White Instrument
Company and then the White Serum Company. But,
yeah, I went through that period, came back, had a
boss that was a real stickler. Anytime I hear now
about Stadium plays, not earning their salters,
all that kind of stuff. I can look back and I was on
the road many times up to six weeks without coming
home because I would file an itinerary with the
boss before I left Austin. And I would meet that
itinerary almost like you would a agenda. You'd be
at a certain place at a certain time, and you'd do a
certain job. And in those days, to start out, food
and drug was running down the old empirical
products that were available in the drugstores.
Even chasing my old alleged veterinarian who had,
oh, what did he call himself? He had a medicine show
out of Waco. had a monstrous replica of a, what's
the word I want to use, a petrified log, and a little
museum in it, and then he'd put on a big pitch at
nighttime. And we recorded him, and used that
recorded spiel as part of his advertising
program, and finally got a conviction on him.
Those type things were the beginning of Food and
Drug Administration. That will graduate on up
into the passage of the state milk inspection law.
We went out and went from town to town and would sell
the standard milk ordinance provided by the U.S.
Public Health Service. to set some standards and
milk supplies within the communities. Started
out with the advent of the little dairy barn and the
cleanliness program and the upgrading in general
all the way up to TB testing. And a very fascinating
period of time. Many experiences there where you
just felt like you were beating your head against
the wall. I had one down in Oh, I think they call it
Baytown now. It used to be Goose Creek.
Very fascinating period of time. Many
experiences there where you just felt like you
were beating your head against the wall. I had one
down in, oh, I think they call it Baytown now. It
used to be Goose Creek, Baytown, and Pillay. There
were three little communities outside of
Houston. And they operated a creamery. It was
owned and operated by the Galveston Houston
Brewing Company. And we had some complaints and
squawks. And so I went into there, and it was
terrible. The creamer was horrible, but the
dairies were worse. And so I called Austin and got
help, and we started inspecting dairies. And they
finally wound up with a big session at the
courthouse, And by that time, we had built a kind of
a reliable spirit. And the city health officer
took on, he took to it like a duck to water. And his
pet project was a wash pan and a bar of soap in the
barn where they could wash their heads between
milk and so forth. That was his pet. Ours was all up
to stainless steel containers and separate
utensil rooms and things of that nature. But
anyhow, that long story short there. Now, this was
all you were working for the State Department of
Health.
Well, the left was kind of mixed emotions because
you couldn't tell by the response of the public
here and all like that what would happen. But when
we came back at the prescribed time, it was just
almost miraculous what they had done. They'd
often meet us out front, for example, and start
cheering on us, pushing all the money you cost me
and all that damn stuff. Then they'd take you
around back and have a whole brand new barn,
followed your little plan, everything perfect.
And it gave us the inspiration then to go on and get
on to the creamer. And we filed injunctions and
everything and got to the creamer and got it all
cleaned too. But this was the early beginning of
the milk inspection. And I had the opportunity to
grow up during that period. Then came the meat
inspection. And I had the equal opportunity to
grow up in that. Meat inspection came much slower
and much harder because they had already
established some forms of federal meat
inspection, such as Armour and Swift in
Dallas-Fort Worth, Swift and Company in San
Antonio. They had begun to build plants under
federal regulation, but state had no regulations
at that time. And we had the typical situation in
that with the little old or maybe an eight by eight
amortor, they called it, or butcher pit, or
slaughterhouse, or whatever it was called. And we
grew up with that. And that's when we began to use
more muscle than we had with milk inspection. Milk
inspection was primarily educational. When we
got into meat inspection, it was a question of, we
were coming in late, the federal had already set
the basis, and so we started out by enforcement. uh
contamination uh food exposed to uh what was the
word there was a basic principle in there that
covered everything like grab all apple pies
exposure of food to film that's it and we filed
charges and we met lots of jps we learned how to show
him how to fill out the What do you call them? Yeah,
they're the forms. You had to fill out the file
charges. And we'd help him do all that. In many
cases, he was pretty nervous. Because I was old
Bill, or Jim, he knew personally. But it worked out
into a beautiful setup. And of course, then after I
left the State Health Department, In 1941 or
thereabouts, I was given a Department of
Assistant State Veteran. Very much the same
duties except with Animal World. In South Texas, I
had all of South Texas as my territory. Now today
they're called Regional Veterinarians or
something like that. But anyhow, we were subject
to call any time on Hopefully, we didn't involve
ourselves in general practice or the general
practitioners, except in cases of so-called
disease outbreaks. And we were allowed practice
privileges at home, and that's one of the reasons I
took it, because I wanted to get back home. I stayed
here then all the time. Now, I lived here all the
time, but I was gone. so much that in 1941 I came back
here. I settled down and built a house up on a hill.
Built a little clinic in the backyard and then
spent a great deal of time on the road. Anthrax
outbreaks down around Quero, sleeping sickness
outbreaks around Eagle Pass, rabies outbreaks
here and there in Corpus Christi. Just all types of
those type things and I grew up into that. And I
literally mean grow up, because you start out with
very little experience. And then you build on it
by, oh, I had some wonderful tutors going back to
A&M with Dr. Hubert Schmidt, who was head of the
experiment station. The old man taught me a lot of
tricks of the philosophy of building history.
There's a man we could have gotten a lot of course.
He wrote the history, but we could have gotten a lot
of oral interviews out of him. Oh, well. Because he
died prematurely. Well, but he was stubborn. Much
later in the game, I tried everywhere in the world
to get his memoirs. But he had that streak in him
that he had worked hard and developed it, and he was
holding on to those papers. Now, what for, I don't
know. Well, some of it was published. Oh, yeah, but
not nearly the way it should have been published.
But, yeah, long story short, that, again, is him.
He helped me a lot because I had him on several of the
problems I had. In other words, as a state
representative of the state veterinarian's
office, You could call upon and get assistance of a
lot more people than you could probably just a
general practitioner like Phil Smith at Big
Spring. There's lots of experiences out of that
man. I had a good one over at Navasota. Bob,
I'll put his name in a few minutes. He worked for me
later on. But anyhow, I rely a whole lot upon those
old-timers and their approaches to the thing
because actually when you get into those type
outbreaks and so forth, they're not true medical
problems oftentimes as much as they are just
putting two and two together and trying to come up
with an approach to What is very obvious, you can
see pretty well. You worked into a political
problem, too, sometimes. Sometimes, because a
lot of the calls that you made were referred by a
representative or a legislator or a governor or
somebody to the state veterinarian's office. The
Office of the State Veterinarian wasn't too easy
to manage then because you didn't have any
representatives on the board from the
professions, right? Right, right, and very
little info, or what would you call it,
infrastructure relationship. It was, oh, I don't
know, just something that kind of grew with no
particular principal involved. I think, again,
it sounded like bragging or whatnot but
completing this assistant 41 period assistant
state veterinarian there was a transition was
obviously going to take place in the state
veterinarian's office and Dr. T.O. Booth was the
state veterinarian at the time and he was gearing
up to go back into the military as a retreat 1942,
43. And he even had a double hernia repair and
everything, get ready to get back in, and they took
him back in. But in the meantime, the groundwork
was rolling, and a group of colleagues of mine got
together in Austin. I wasn't even present. I
didn't know what was going on, and they decided
that ours should be the next state veterinary. And
it reached the stage where they were also going to
supplement my salary by entertaining to all the
veterans of texas that they contributed of amount
of x number of dollars or whatnot to the state led
there because the salary at that time was 2760 a
year plus expense but i agreed to go and give it a
trial but i told them i did not want to die from
because every time I put on a necktie, that would
come from Dr. So-and-so and so-and-so. All I'd do
is just go try. So I went to Fort Worth in 1943, a
state-led name, and bless his heart, Dr. Leon
Cloud was, by that time, serving as the interim
awaiting somebody's appointment. And I was still
basically involved as assistant to him. And I went
up Knocked on his door, told him who I was, and he
jumped up out of his chair and said, Al, I guess he
came after this chair. I said, well, I guess that's
what he did, but didn't they tell you? He said, they
didn't tell me a damn thing. So there I was, a bad
bunch of my senior, and here I was just kidding. So
we had a long heart-to-heart session that he had
worked for the state for a number of years. at the
fabulous salary of $166.66 a month. And so I told
him that with me coming in, I was going to try it, I
was green as grass, and I would prefer to just start
and stop. And so I would recommend that he look for
something to do. Or I was going to fire him. Well,
boy, he got all bristled up and hostile and stormed
out of there. About a week later, he called me in, a
guy named Steinlein. The veterinarian had a
lutealosis testing laboratory, one of the first.
Howdy. Good evening. How are you? Quite good.